Measuring Python Performance with `timeit`
==========================================

Performance does not matter, unless it does
-------------------------------------------

When you write a program, you should **not** worry too much about performance during the initial stages of the coding process.
The important thing at that stage is writing clear code that is well-documented, easy to maintain, and will be extensible in the future.
This goes doubly so for Python: the language isn't exactly a speed demon to begin with, so performance optimizations can only take you so far.
That said, if a program runs too slow for its intended usage purpose, you need to find a way to make it faster.
And the first step in that process is figuring out which steps of the program take a long time.

The right choice of algorithm and data structures can have a huge impact on performance.
For example, sets and dictionaries allow for much faster retrieval of items compared to a list.
When a list is sorted, binary search is faster than linear search.
Or at least that's what the theory says.
In practice, you'll want to measure the performance of your program to get some concrete results.

The `timeit` package
--------------------

### Simplest case

The `timeit` package provides an easy way of measuring how long certain computations take.
The simplest usage scenario revolves around the function `timeit.default_timer()`, which ask the operating system for the current time.
You can store this value in a variable, e.g. `start`:

```python
import timeit

start = timeit.default_timer()
```

Put this line right before the code the performance of which you wish to measure.
For example, you might have the following:

```python
import random
improt timeit

# function to be tested
def multiply(n):
    if n < 1:
        return 0
    number = 1
    for n in range(1, n):
        number *= n
    return n

# get start time
start = timeit.default_timer()
# run code
n = random.randint(1, 10**4)
```

Immediately after the code, you again call `timeit.default_timer()` to get the current time.
Subtracting `start` from this new value gives us the difference between the current time and the time before the code was run.
This difference is the amount of milliseconds the code took to run.

```python
import random
import timeit

# function to be tested
def multiply(n):
    if n < 1:
        return 0
    number = 1
    for n in range(1, n):
        number *= n
    return n

# get start time
start = timeit.default_timer()
# run code
n = random.randint(1, 10**4)
print(n, multiply(n), timeit.default_timer() - start)
```

For the very simple measurements we take in this class, this approach is sufficient.
However, it has two major downsides:

1. You have to manually specify the measuring points.
1. Unless you add a loop to take multiple measurements, only one measurement will be taken.
   This makes the result somewhat unreliable - if your computer is temporarily busy with some other task, fewer resources will be available for Python and some of the code may run more slowly.

To fix this, we have to make better use of the capabilities of `timeit`.

### Advanced usage

What we really want is to create a timer object that can carry out and store multiple measurements for us.
This is done with the `timeit.repeat` function.
But before we look at this, let's consider the simpler case of `timeit.timeit`.
This function takes three arguments:

- `stmt`: the code to be tested, as a single string
- `setup`: the setup code as a single string; this is used to load any packages or definitions that are needed for the test code to run
- `number`: how many executions of the test code should be part of a single measurement

This may seem confusing, so let's look at a concrete example.

```python
import timeit

# we need random for the test code to work
mysetup = """import random"""

# the test code runs multiply with a random integer between 0 and 10^4
mycode = """
def multiply(n):
    if n < 1:
        return 0
    number = 1
    for n in range(1, number):
        number *= n
    return n

n = random.randint(0, 10**4)
multiply(n)
"""

# how long does it take to run multiply 100 times?
time = timeit.timeit(setup = mysetup,
                     stmt = mycode,
                     number = 100)
print(time)
```

When you run the code above, `timeit` will tell you how long it took to run 100 instances of `multiply` with random integers.
However, this code still runs the test battery only once.
We could get more accurate results by running the battery multiple times and averaging the output.
We can do this with `timeit.repeat`.
It works exactly like `timeit.timeit`, but it also takes a `repeat` parameter

- `repeat`: how many repetitions of the test battery should be run

For example, if `timeit.repeat` is run with `repeat = 5`, it returns a list with 5 elements.
Each elements shows how long it took to run one of the test batteries.
This can be used to compute the average runtime.

```python
import timeit

# we need random for the test code to work
mysetup = """import random"""

# the test code runs multiply with a random integer between 0 and 10^4
mycode = """
def multiply(n):
    if n < 1:
        return 0
    number = 1
    for n in range(1, number):
        number *= n
    return n

n = random.randint(1, 10**4)
multiply(n)
"""

# how long does it take to run multiply 100 times?
times = timeit.repeat(setup = mysetup,
                      stmt = mycode,
                      number = 100,
                      repeat = 3)

# all values
print(times)

print("Average:", sum(times) / len(times))
print("Fastest:", min(times))
print("Slowest:", min(times))
```

### Trick: Importing from `__main__`

The code above is still somewhat unsatisfying because we have to define the functions to be tested as part of the test code.
That is not only inelegant, it also means that part of the measurement includes the time for defining the function.
We want to factor the code so that the definition of the functions and the measurements we take of them are two entirely separate pieces of code.
Here is how that is done:

```python
import timeit

# function to be tested
def multiply(n):
    if n < 1:
        return 0
    number = 1
    for n in range(1, n):
        number *= n
    return n

# the measurement code
mysetup = """
from __main__ import multiply
import random"""

mycode = """
n = random.randint(1, 10**4)
multiply(n)"""

times = timeit.repeat(setup = mysetup,
                      stmt = mycode,
                      number = 100,
                      repeat = 3)

print("Average search time:", sum(times) / len(times))
```

The crucial trick is the use of `from __main__ import multiply`.
Here `__main__` refers to the Python file that is being run from the Python shell.
So if you save the code above in a file called `measure_example.py` and run it with `python3 -i measure_example.py`, then `__main__` refers to that very file.
Python then will look at that code and import the `multiply` function that is defined in `measure_example.py`.
Once multiply has been imported in the setup code for `timeit`, it can be called as any other defined function in the test code.

Of course this is even more elegant when the functions to be tested are in different files, as is the case for linear search and binary search.
That is exactly the case for linear search and binary search.
So `test.py` could be revised to contain this more elaborate piece of code.
I leave it up to you to decide whether this code is more readable, though.

```python
import timeit

# define a general measurement function
def measure_time(search_function="linear_search",
                 list_length=10,
                 number=1, repeat=10):
    # we use {} placeholders to insert search_function
    # and list_length into the strings
    mysetup = """
from linear_search import linear_search
from binary_search import binary_search
import random
search_item = random.randint(0, 10000)
search_list = [random.randint(0, 100000) for _ in range({})]
""".format(list_length)
    mycode = """{}(search_list, search_item)""".format(search_function)
    return timeit.repeat(setup = mysetup,
                         stmt = mycode,
                         number = number,
                         repeat = repeat)


for length in [10**n for n in range(7)]:
    print("-----", length, "-----")
    for search in ("linear_search", "binary_search"):
        times = measure_time(search_function=search,
                             list_length=length)
        print(search, sum(times) / len(times))
```
